<a id="Topology_Types"></a>

## Topology Types
  <a id="getfaceedges_returntype"></a>

# getfaceedges_returntype

A composite type that consists of a sequence number and an edge number.

## Description


 A composite type that consists of a sequence number and an edge number. This is the return type for `ST_GetFaceEdges` and `GetNodeEdges` functions.


1. `sequence` is an integer: Refers to a topology defined in the topology.topology table which defines the topology schema and srid.
2. `edge` is an integer: The identifier of an edge.
  <a id="topogeometry"></a>

# TopoGeometry

A composite type representing a topologically defined geometry.

## Description


A composite type that refers to a topology geometry in a specific topology layer, having a specific type and a specific id. The elements of a TopoGeometry are the properties: topology_id, layer_id, id integer, type integer.


1. `topology_id` is an integer: Refers to a topology defined in the topology.topology table which defines the topology schema and srid.
2. `layer_id` is an integer: The layer_id in the layers table that the TopoGeometry belongs to. The combination of topology_id, layer_id provides a unique reference in the topology.layers table.
3. `id` is an integer: The id is the autogenerated sequence number that uniquely defines the topogeometry in the respective topology layer.
4. `type` integer between 1 - 4 that defines the geometry type: 1:[multi]point, 2:[multi]line, 3:[multi]poly, 4:collection


## Casting Behavior


This section lists the automatic as well as explicit casts allowed for this data type


| Cast To | Behavior |
| geometry | automatic |


## See Also


[CreateTopoGeom](topogeometry-constructors.md#CreateTopoGeom)
  <a id="validatetopology_returntype"></a>

# validatetopology_returntype

A composite type that consists of an error message and id1 and id2 to denote location of error. This is the return type for `ValidateTopology`.

## Description


A composite type that consists of an error message and two integers. The [ValidateTopology](topology-and-topogeometry-management.md#ValidateTopology) function returns a set of these to denote validation errors and the id1 and id2 to denote the ids of the topology objects involved in the error.


1. `error` is varchar: Denotes type of error.

   Current error descriptors are: coincident nodes, edge crosses node, edge not simple, edge end node geometry mismatch, edge start node geometry mismatch, face overlaps face,face within face,
2. `id1` is an integer: Denotes identifier of edge / face / nodes in error.
3. `id2` is an integer: For errors that involve 2 objects denotes the secondary edge / or node


## See Also


[ValidateTopology](topology-and-topogeometry-management.md#ValidateTopology)
