<a id="functions-uuid"></a>

## UUID Functions


 [UUID Generation Functions](#func_uuid_gen_table) shows the PostgreSQL functions that can be used to generate UUIDs.
 <a id="func_uuid_gen_table"></a>

**Table: UUID Generation Functions**

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Function</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Example(s)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><code>gen_random_uuid</code> ( ) <code>uuid</code></td>
<td><code>uuidv4</code> ( ) <code>uuid</code></td>
<td>Generates a version 4 (random) UUID<br><code>gen_random_uuid()</code> <code>5b30857f-0bfa-48b5-ac0b-5c64e28078d1</code><br><code>uuidv4()</code> <code>b42410ee-132f-42ee-9e4f-09a6485c95b8</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>uuidv7</code> ( [ <code>shift</code> <code>interval</code> ] ) <code>uuid</code></td>
<td>Generates a version 7 (time-ordered) UUID. The timestamp is computed using UNIX timestamp with millisecond precision + sub-millisecond timestamp + random. The optional parameter <code>shift</code> will shift the computed timestamp by the given <code>interval</code>.</td>
<td><code>uuidv7()</code> <code>019535d9-3df7-79fb-b466-fa907fa17f9e</code></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


!!! note

    The [uuid-ossp](../../appendixes/additional-supplied-modules-and-extensions/uuid-ossp-a-uuid-generator.md#uuid-ossp) module provides additional functions that implement other standard algorithms for generating UUIDs.


 [UUID Extraction Functions](#func_uuid_extract_table) shows the PostgreSQL functions that can be used to extract information from UUIDs.
 <a id="func_uuid_extract_table"></a>

**Table: UUID Extraction Functions**

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Function</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Example(s)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><code>uuid_extract_timestamp</code> ( <code>uuid</code> ) <code>timestamp with time zone</code></td>
<td>Extracts a <code>timestamp with time zone</code> from a UUID of version 1 or 7. For other versions, this function returns null. Note that the extracted timestamp is not necessarily exactly equal to the time the UUID was generated; this depends on the implementation that generated the UUID.</td>
<td><code>uuid_extract_timestamp('019535d9-3df7-79fb-b466-​fa907fa17f9e'::uuid)</code> <code>2025-02-23 21:46:24.503-05</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>uuid_extract_version</code> ( <code>uuid</code> ) <code>smallint</code></td>
<td>Extracts the version from a UUID of one of the variants described by <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9562">RFC 9562</a>. For other variants, this function returns null. For example, for a UUID generated by <code>gen_random_uuid()</code>, this function will return 4.</td>
<td><code>uuid_extract_version('41db1265-8bc1-4ab3-992f-​885799a4af1d'::uuid)</code> <code>4</code><br><code>uuid_extract_version('019535d9-3df7-79fb-b466-​fa907fa17f9e'::uuid)</code> <code>7</code></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


 PostgreSQL also provides the usual comparison operators shown in [Comparison Operators](comparison-functions-and-operators.md#functions-comparison-op-table) for UUIDs.


 See [UUID Type](../data-types/uuid-type.md#datatype-uuid) for details on the data type `uuid` in PostgreSQL.
