<a id="catalog-pg-attribute"></a>

## `pg_attribute`


 The catalog `pg_attribute` stores information about table columns. There will be exactly one `pg_attribute` row for every column in every table in the database. (There will also be attribute entries for indexes, and indeed all objects that have [`pg_class`](pg_class.md#catalog-pg-class) entries.)


 The term attribute is equivalent to column and is used for historical reasons.


**Table: `pg_attribute` Columns**

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th><p>Column Type</p>
<p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attrelid</code> <code>oid</code> (references <a href="pg_class.md#catalog-pg-class"><code>pg_class</code></a>.<code>oid</code>)</p>
<p>The table this column belongs to</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attname</code> <code>name</code></p>
<p>The column name</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>atttypid</code> <code>oid</code> (references <a href="pg_type.md#catalog-pg-type"><code>pg_type</code></a>.<code>oid</code>)</p>
<p>The data type of this column (zero for a dropped column)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attlen</code> <code>int2</code></p>
<p>A copy of <code>pg_type.typlen</code> of this column's type</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attnum</code> <code>int2</code></p>
<p>The number of the column. Ordinary columns are numbered from 1 up. System columns, such as <code>ctid</code>, have (arbitrary) negative numbers.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attcacheoff</code> <code>int4</code></p>
<p>Always -1 in storage, but when loaded into a row descriptor in memory this might be updated to cache the offset of the attribute within the row</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>atttypmod</code> <code>int4</code></p>
<p><code>atttypmod</code> records type-specific data supplied at table creation time (for example, the maximum length of a <code>varchar</code> column). It is passed to type-specific input functions and length coercion functions. The value will generally be -1 for types that do not need <code>atttypmod</code>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attndims</code> <code>int2</code></p>
<p>Number of dimensions, if the column is an array type; otherwise 0. (Presently, the number of dimensions of an array is not enforced, so any nonzero value effectively means “it's an array”.)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attbyval</code> <code>bool</code></p>
<p>A copy of <code>pg_type.typbyval</code> of this column's type</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attalign</code> <code>char</code></p>
<p>A copy of <code>pg_type.typalign</code> of this column's type</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attstorage</code> <code>char</code></p>
<p>Normally a copy of <code>pg_type.typstorage</code> of this column's type. For TOAST-able data types, this can be altered after column creation to control storage policy.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attcompression</code> <code>char</code></p>
<p>The current compression method of the column. Typically this is <code>'\0'</code> to specify use of the current default setting (see <a href="../../server-administration/server-configuration/client-connection-defaults.md#guc-default-toast-compression">default_toast_compression</a>). Otherwise, <code>'p'</code> selects pglz compression, while <code>'l'</code> selects LZ4 compression. However, this field is ignored whenever <code>attstorage</code> does not allow compression.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attnotnull</code> <code>bool</code></p>
<p>This represents a not-null constraint.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>atthasdef</code> <code>bool</code></p>
<p>This column has a default expression or generation expression, in which case there will be a corresponding entry in the <a href="pg_attrdef.md#catalog-pg-attrdef"><code>pg_attrdef</code></a> catalog that actually defines the expression. (Check <code>attgenerated</code> to determine whether this is a default or a generation expression.)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>atthasmissing</code> <code>bool</code></p>
<p>This column has a value which is used where the column is entirely missing from the row, as happens when a column is added with a non-volatile <code>DEFAULT</code> value after the row is created. The actual value used is stored in the <code>attmissingval</code> column.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attidentity</code> <code>char</code></p>
<p>If a zero byte (<code>''</code>), then not an identity column. Otherwise, <code>a</code> = generated always, <code>d</code> = generated by default.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attgenerated</code> <code>char</code></p>
<p>If a zero byte (<code>''</code>), then not a generated column. Otherwise, <code>s</code> = stored. (Other values might be added in the future.)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attisdropped</code> <code>bool</code></p>
<p>This column has been dropped and is no longer valid. A dropped column is still physically present in the table, but is ignored by the parser and so cannot be accessed via SQL.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attislocal</code> <code>bool</code></p>
<p>This column is defined locally in the relation. Note that a column can be locally defined and inherited simultaneously.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attinhcount</code> <code>int2</code></p>
<p>The number of direct ancestors this column has. A column with a nonzero number of ancestors cannot be dropped nor renamed.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attstattarget</code> <code>int2</code></p>
<p><code>attstattarget</code> controls the level of detail of statistics accumulated for this column by <a href="../../reference/sql-commands/analyze.md#sql-analyze"><code>ANALYZE</code></a>. A zero value indicates that no statistics should be collected. A negative value says to use the system default statistics target. The exact meaning of positive values is data type-dependent. For scalar data types, <code>attstattarget</code> is both the target number of “most common values” to collect, and the target number of histogram bins to create.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attcollation</code> <code>oid</code> (references <a href="pg_collation.md#catalog-pg-collation"><code>pg_collation</code></a>.<code>oid</code>)</p>
<p>The defined collation of the column, or zero if the column is not of a collatable data type</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attacl</code> <code>aclitem[]</code></p>
<p>Column-level access privileges, if any have been granted specifically on this column</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attoptions</code> <code>text[]</code></p>
<p>Attribute-level options, as “keyword=value” strings</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attfdwoptions</code> <code>text[]</code></p>
<p>Attribute-level foreign data wrapper options, as “keyword=value” strings</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><code>attmissingval</code> <code>anyarray</code></p>
<p>This column has a one element array containing the value used when the column is entirely missing from the row, as happens when the column is added with a non-volatile <code>DEFAULT</code> value after the row is created. The value is only used when <code>atthasmissing</code> is true. If there is no value the column is null.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


 In a dropped column's `pg_attribute` entry, `atttypid` is reset to zero, but `attlen` and the other fields copied from [`pg_type`](pg_type.md#catalog-pg-type) are still valid. This arrangement is needed to cope with the situation where the dropped column's data type was later dropped, and so there is no `pg_type` row anymore. `attlen` and the other fields can be used to interpret the contents of a row of the table.
